Both of you may wish to consider using "my" listserv program.  It's a
newer version of the one from USCD than Mossberg's, but I've done
quite a bit of work on it:

	Logging now done through syslog

	Many USCD un-localizations performed

	Much sloppy command parsing repaired, where the number of args
	wasn't checked although it was coded as it they were

	Man page and detailed command help added

	More aliases for commands to hopefully do the right thing in
	more cases added

	'SEND' command to wrap a file or directory in a variety of
	methods added

	Simpleminded installation script added

	I forget what all else.  Do a 'diff -rl' and see for yourself.


You may snag it from:

	ftp.math.ufl.edu:pub/bb/listserv.tar

Or poke at it via:

	listserv@math.ufl.edu


Don't be put off by the size increase; the tar contains an unmodified
copy of the USCD version (for diff -rl), more help, examples, and the
SEND code.  Enjoy.


"To use Fred Brooks' terminology, people keep handing me programs
when I'm expecting programming products."  -- Me
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Brian Bartholomew - bb@math.ufl.edu - Univ. of Florida Dept. of Mathematics

----- 'SEND' help:

        SEND filename

        SEND filename shar

        SEND filename uuencode

                SEND mails you back the file you ask for.  All
                filenames are relative to the anonymous ftp pub
                directory.

                The optional third parameter modifies the default
                packing method, which is simply to split files into
                1500-line chunks.  BITNET users wanting TeX and
                Internet users wanting binary files will need to use
                one of the packing methods with "uuencode" in the
                name, and have the "uudecode" program available at
                your site.  If in doubt, use anonymous ftp in binary
                mode instead of listserv.

                You can get multiple files in a single request by
                giving multiple SEND commands to listserv, one per
                line.  You can see what files are available in a given
                directory with the DIR command.  You can get the list
                of all available files with SEND INDEX.  Note that GET
                and SENDME are synonyms for SEND.


        SEND directoryname

        SEND directoryname shar

        SEND directoryname tar-uuencode

        SEND directoryname tar-compress-uuencode

                This variant packages up an entire directory tree and
                sends it to you.  If you use the default packing
                method, each file in the tree will be split and mailed
                separately.

