		JvNCnet ACCEPTIBLE USE POLICY
		-----------------------------
 
This statement represents a guide to the acceptable use of JvNCnet for
data communications.  It is only intended to address the issue of
JvNCnet use.  In those cases where data communications are carried
across other regional networks or the Internet, JvNCnet users are
advised that acceptable use policies of those other networks apply and
may limit use.
 
JvNCnet member organizations are expected to inform their users of both
the JvNCnet and the NSFNET acceptable use policies.
 
1.	JvNCnet Primary Goals
 
1.1 	JvNCnet, the John von Neumann Computer Network, has been
established to:  1)  provide the highest quality and optimum access of
networking services to the research and educational community of the
United States  and internationally, 2)  offer network resources at the
maximum level of cost-efficiency,  and 3) promote and facilitate
innovation and regional and national competitiveness.  These goals
remain the standard for excellence in service and price and should not
be compromised.
 
2.      JvNCnet Acceptable Use Policy
 
2.1    All use of JvNCnet must be consistent with JvNCnet's primary
goals.
 
2.2	It is not acceptable to use JvNCnet for illegal purposes.
 
2.3  It is not acceptable to use JvNCnet to transmit threatening,
obscene, or harassing materials.
 
2.4    It is not acceptable to use JvNCnet so as to interfere with or
disrupt network users, services or equipment.  Disruptions include, but
are not limited to, distribution of unsolicited advertising, propagation
of computer worms and viruses, and using the network to make
unauthorized entry to any other machine accessible via the network.
 
2.5  	It is assumed that information and resources accessible via
JvNCnet are private to the individuals and organizations which own or
hold rights to those resources and information unless specifically
stated otherwise by the owners or holders of rights.  It is therefore
not acceptable for an individual to use JvNCnet to access information or
resources unless permission to do so has been granted by the owners or
holders of rights to those resources or information.
 
3.      Violation of Policy
 
3.1   JvNCnet will review alleged violations of Acceptable Use Policy on
a case by-case basis.  Clear violations of policy which are not promptly
remedied by member organization may result in termination of JvNCnet
membership and network services to member.
 
