From caf-talk Caf Apr 13 19:56:42 1994
From: kadie@eff.org (Carl M. Kadie)
Newsgroups: comp.admin.policy,alt.comp.acad-freedom.talk
Subject: Swinburne U. of Technology (Australia) computer policy
Date: 13 Apr 1994 19:56:41 -0400
Message-ID: <2oi0rp$bgf@eff.org>

=============
Swinburne University of Technology

Network Access
and
Code of Practice Policy

Computer Services & Information Technology

November 1993

Version l.5D

NETWORK ACCESS AND CODE OF PRACTICE

1. The function of Swinburne's communications networks is to carry material
which supports the academic, teaching and research enterprise of the University
and that this material may include news, mail, and ancillary materials relevant
to the aims and objectives of the organisation.

1.1 In support of this principle the University permits the use of the
University's internal networks by staff, undergraduate and postgraduate
students (1).

1.2 In addition, access to the Australian Academic and Research Network
(AARNet) by staff, undergraduate and postgraduate students is permitted for the
purpose of legitimate academic and research activities. This access is subject
to the AARNet code of practice (appendix A)

1.3 While permitting access to AARNet and Internet resources, access to non-
public domain facilities is not permitted without explicit authorisation from
the owner of the remote facility.

2. While supporting the general principle of open and universal student access,
eligibility for service which will enable such access will be determined by the
following priorities where insufficient resources are available.

2.1 The highest priority is awarded to students where network access is a
mandatory requirement of a research program or prescribed course of study as
defined in the subject or course guide.

2.2 At the next level, access will be granted where there is a demonstrated,
but non-mandatory requirement for network access as proscribed by the research
program, or subject or course guide.

2.3 The lowest or non-essential level of access will be based upon the general
principle of universal access and support for academic pursuit while not
directly stipulated within a prescribed course of study.

3. Direct access to the Australian Academic Network and the international
Internet will only be permitted from a secure host. This restriction applies to
all students, however staff will be permitted to directly connect to the
external networks where written application is made to the Manager, Computer
Services and Information Technology. Permission will only be granted subject to
certain conditions:

3.1 The host to be used for external access must be under the control of an
authorised system administrator who will take due care and diligence to
maintain the integrity and validity of the user base.

3.2 The host must be registered within the primary University Domain Name
Server and be allocated a legitimate Internet Address.

3.3 The host must support and implement user password protection.

4. Use from within the University's network by individuals or organisations
other than staff, students, or legitimate affiliates (2) is not permitted.

5. The rules governing academic freedom at the University will apply to the use
of the communications networks, where the objective is the transmission and
pursuit of knowledge.

6. The network code of practice includes the use of the communications networks
for the purpose of administrative support activities associated with the
academic and research activities including social interaction between members
of the University community.

7. The use of Swinburne communications networks for financial gain not related
to the normal activities of the University is deemed to be unacceptable
practice.

8. Access to the Internet News Service is permitted where this is in pursuit of
the academic and research objectives of the University.

8.1 The selection of accessible news groups will be based on the relevance of
the information disseminated by the news groups to Swinburne's teaching and
research.

8.2 The process of selection will be based upon a consensus agreement between
the requestor and the Manager, Computer Services and Information Technology,
that the news group in question is beneficial to the educational, research or
operational objectives of the University.

8.3 The University will allow staff, undergraduate and postgraduate students
and legitimate affiliates to post to Internet News Groups, however this must be
from a secure host.

8.4 While permitting the use of News readers from unsecured hosts or personal
computers, the ability to post will be restricted to secure hosts or as per
section two.

9. The University does not permit the transfer of user-lD and password between
authorised or non-authorised persons. Such action is deemed unacceptable and
will be the subject of disciplinary action. Further:

9.1 Where it is necessary to allow an authorised third person to access a users
files or data, as in the case of illness or changing of positions, this
information will be transferred by the system administrator rather than via the
transfer of user-ID and password.

9.2 Staff user accounts and all data found in user accounts will be removed
from all University facilities following the termination of employment for
whatever reason.

9.3 Student user accounts and all data found in user accounts will be removed
at the end of each calendar year for completing undergraduate students.
Students deferring, or terminating will have their accounts removed from the
effective date of their deferral or termination.

9.4 Post graduate user accounts will be removed as from the effective
completion of their course of study, deferral or termination.

9.5 The user accounts and data of legitimate affiliates will be removed by
mutual consent upon termination of the formal affiliation.

10. The ability to post and receive electronic mail may be made available to
all staff, undergraduate and postgraduate students, ( subject to the provisions
of section 2 ) and legitimate affiliates possessing valid user accounts
administered through a secure host.


11. The use of the electronic mail system for the distribution of unsolicited
information or advertising not relating to the normal activities and business
of the university is not to be permitted.

12. Private communications across the University's data networks will have the
same protection as private communications via telephone. Unauthorised
interception, reading, copying or modifying of private electronic data (3) will
be in breach of this code of practice and subject to disciplinary or legal
proceedings. The University will not guarantee this privacy as a result of
routine maintenance, technical fault or criminal activity. Further:

12.1 No University employee will be permitted to intercept, read, copy or
modify private electronic data (either in transit across a network or stored
within a computer system) without the written consent of the Vice-Chancellor or
the consent of the addressee.

12.2 University employees who possess root or supervisor password access will
not be permitted to intercept, read, copy or modify private electronic data
(either in transit across a network or stored within a computer system) without
the written consent of the Vice-Chancellor.

13. While the University will endeavour to maintain the privacy of personal
communications it will monitor traffic load, and where necessary take action to
protect the integrity and operation of its networks. Further the University
will:

13.1 Collect utilisation statistics based upon network address, network
protocol and application use.

13.2 Progressively restrict non-essential users (as defined under section 2)
where network utilisation results in performance degradation. Such restriction
will be publicised to users through appropriate means.

14. University network facilities cannot be used by any individual or group of
persons for any activities of an illegal or fraudulent nature, including such
illegal activities as defined under the Australian Commonwealth Government
Telecommunications Act 1989, or other applicable State and Commonwealth laws.

14.1 Any suspected illegal or fraudulent activity must be immediately reported
to the Manager, Computer Services and Information Technology who will notify
the Vice-Chancellor.

15. Users who breach this code of practice may, after due process, be refused
access to the University's computer and communications networks.

15.1 In cases involving alleged illegal or fraudulent activity, the University
may, at the discretion of the Vice-Chancellor suspend access privileges pending
the outcome of legal proceedings.

15.2 Breaches of this Access and Code of Practice Policy, which do not involve
illegal or fraudulent activity, will be referred to the relevant student or
staff disciplinary committee for consideration.


Footnotes

1. This definition includes all students currently enrolled in advanced sector,
TAFE and continuing education courses offered by the University.

2. The definition of affiliate includes government, semi-government and non-
government organisations which join with the university in support of the
academic and research enterprise. Individuals who meet this criteria should
also be considered affiliates

3. In this instance private electronic data is defined as all information able
to be stored within a digital computer system or transferred across an
electronic communications system and which exists in or is being transferred
from or into a registered user's domain which is password protected by that
user.

Appendix A

AARNET ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY

1. The function of AARNet is to carry material which supports the academic and
research enterprise of higher education institutions and CSIRO and that this
material may include news and ancillary materials relevant to the aims and
objectives of these organisations.

Additional notes of relevance to acceptable material as described in 1. above:

1.1 The AVCC, in conjunction with CSIRO and through the AARNet Advisory Board,
will decide which categories of material it will allow to be transmitted and
those it will not transmit;

1.2 Specific materials not normally transmitted through the network may be
provided to individual sites if the materials are required by network members
for legitimate teaching and/or research purposes and if the request for such
materials is supported by the Chief Executive Officer of the institution
requesting such materials; and

1.3 If material which AARNet has resolved should not be transmitted is injected
into the network the membership of the network member responsible for that
action may be terminated by the AVCC.

2. This acceptable use policy includes the use of AARNet in connection with the
administrative activities of the member organisations of AARNet, and also
includes the use of AARNet for institutional support services.

3. This acceptable use policy includes the use of AARNet in support of the
various infrastructural service support activities associated with the academic
and research enterprise.

4. Use of AARNet for commercial purposes, and use of AARNet for purposes
unrelated to the broad areas of relevance to the academic and research
community is not considered acceptable use of AARNet services.

5. The use of AARNet by Australian organisations other than AVCC member
institutions and CSIRO divisions requires the execution of an AARNet Affiliate
Membership Agreement by the organisation and the AVCC. The AVCC reserves the
right to approve each application for Affiliate Membership on a case by case
basis.

6. Traffic originating from peer academic and research networks which conforms
to the originating network's acceptable use policies is in general considered
acceptable traffic to be carried over AARNet.

7. AARNet facilities cannot be used by any individual or group of persons for
any activities of an illegal or fraudulent nature, including such illegal
activities as defined under the Australian Commonwealth Govemment
Telecommunications Act 1989, or other applicable State and Commonwealth laws.

Summary:

This acceptable use policy of AARNet includes the use of AARNet in connection
with the administration of the AARNet member institutions, and also includes
the use of AARNet for institutional support services, such as library
communications activities. Also included within these usage guidelines is usage
of AARNet in connection with the various service support activities in relation
to academic and research activities.
==========
